# Ruthie is turning 1

It's hard to believe that Ruthie turns a year old in just a few days.
As they say, "the nights are long but the years are short", and so far this
rings true.
Ruthie's birthday has prompted me to reflect a little on what I've learned
during these past twelve months.

As we were leaving for the hospital I remember thinking "I just need a little
more time".
Not to prepare for becoming a parent, but _to learn a little more linear
algebra_.
Ruthie, if you're reading this, I'm sorry I wasn't thinking more about you and
your future at the time.
I think I anticipated not having a moment of free time for the rest of my life.
While I've certainly had much less free time than before, I still have enough to
learn a thing here or there.

And although I have less time now, I've begun to think differently about how I
learn.
I realized only too late that I'd become trapped in a morass of abstract
theoretical perfection: when learning something new, if I didn't feel entirely
confident that I understood the preliminaries with absolute confidence, I'd go
back to those preliminaries, and repeat.
And since this kind of certainty isn't attainable, I spent a lot of time just
spinning my wheels.
I had become afraid to jump blindly into new topics.

I was jolted out of this while reading Verner Vinge's _Rainbows End_.
Even though I was underwhelmed by the book[^vv], I was struck by a particular
passage in which an old man is taught to use new technology.
He's initially frustrated by how much things have changed, but at some point he
relaxes, relents, and just starts playing around.
In that moment he realizes that he's learning like a child again, "doing without
understanding".

[^vv]: Sorry V.V.
  If it's any consolation, I give _A Fire Upon the Deep_ a 5/5.

After that I began to notice, really consciously notice, that this is exactly
what Ruthie was doing in all her waking moments.
Somehow this little baby who knew almost nothing would someday understand
things, but her path would involve a great deal of "doing without understanding"
first.
The lesson here for me is to continue to "do without understanding".
I find it interesting that this can be parsed in two ways:

- (do) (without understanding): to learn in a primarily "active" or creative
  mode, not getting too caught up in formalities, or worrying too much about
  correctness.
  This is exploratory play.
- (do without) (understanding): to make do without the luxury of full
  understanding.
  In any case, "full understanding" is most likely unattainable, and we almost
  always need to make do without it.
  
My aim here isn't to belittle abstract thinking at all.
I imagine that most people either tend to be more comtemplative ("thinking
more") or more active ("doing more").
We need to spend time in both of these modes to be productive, and if I don't
watch myself I spend way to much time being contemplative.
So this is a reminder to myself (thank you Ruthie and Vernor) to think, just not
too hard.

As this note testifies, I've also started writing more.
Aside from simply improving my writing, this serves several purposes:
- I'd like to clarify my thoughts.
  I'm continually surprised at how lucid some idea will appear in my head, and
  how quickly it vanishes when I attempt to write it down.
  So far, writing has been a good check on the quality of my ideas.
- I'd like to remember more.
  Several years ago while looking for a new job, I wrote a short article about
  binary heaps.
  I've since used binary heaps on several occasions; each time I've either
  remembered the important details or quickly refreshed my memory by consulting
  that essay.
- I'd like to become a clearer speaker.
  Clear writing and clear speaking both demand clear thinking and the ability to
  express thoughts in words.
  I've noticed on several occasions that I'm a _terrible_ speaker, but as I've
  written more I've begun to improve.

Lastly, each day I develop a greater appreciation for just _doing the next thing_.
What I mean by this is that, say we need to prepare dinner, and the sink is full
of dishes, and there's laundry to be done, and a million other things besides
those.
Instead of becoming overwhelmed by this I now try and just do the next obvious
thing that gets me closer to my goal.
That might mean forgetting about everything else for a moment, and just washing
a few dishes.
The real power of this is that by doing the next little thing, and then the next
little thing, and then the next, eventually a lot of stuff gets done.
The same applies to learning.

So here's to you, little Ruthie.
Happy first birthday from a dad who loves you more than he could have imagined,
and who's already learned more from you than he'd ever anticipated.
